Good morning and welcome.
As we were setting up for the conference,
I had in the database that this was
Keithley secret session number one.
I had a number of people ask me if
I had a second secret session and,
well, no, I wasn't so lucky.
The reason why this was secret is
because we really wanted to make a
dramatic statement about some new
features in our acceleration libraries.
What we'll be talking about today
will be techniques that you can use to
accelerate image processing using the
image as part of the Accelerate Library.
So, to do that,
let me bring up Robert Murley.
Thank you, Craig.
I'm very happy to be here this
morning to introduce to all of you
a major new technology from Apple,
our vector-accelerated image
processing library called Vimage.
Before I jump into that demonstration,
though,
there's another message that I would
like to make right here at the outset.
All of the vector libraries
starting with Panther are
going to be contained in a new,
high-performance,
state-of-the-art computing
framework called Accelerate.
Accelerate contains not only Vimage,
the major subject of this talk today,
but also all of the vector
libraries that have been available
previously in OS versions in
the framework called VecLib.
The Digital Signal Processing Library,
the Basic Linear Algebra Subroutines,
LAPAC, the Math Libraries,
and the BigNum Library.
So I wanted to make sure that
that was clear before we went on.
Now, today we're getting into the main
part of the demonstration here.
What you'll learn about Vimage, well,
that may be a little optimistic.
I'm going to try to convey
about Vimage anyway.
Functionality, data structures and API,
at least some of the examples of them.
It's much too extensive
to go over completely.
Some of the features that are not
included in the first two subjects.
Then I'm going to bring up
one of my colleagues in the
vector and numerics group,
Yann Olman,
who will talk about implementation
techniques and performance.
And then finally,
although it's not on this slide,
there will be a section at
the end by Eric Miller of the
Architecture and Performance Group on
an overview of the CHUD tools,
the performance tools.
So what is in the functionality
of the Vimage library?
It can be broadly grouped into
these main topics listed here.
I'm going to talk a little
bit about each one of them,
so I won't belabor it at this point.
But at this time,
I'd like to jump into the
first demo of the morning.
What I want to show you is an image
processing function called inversion,
which is a very simple technique
where each pixel of an image,
in fact each color
component of each pixel,
the complement of that value is taken.
So what you see here is a picture of
a bed and breakfast in Portugal that
I happened to stay at earlier this year.
And what I'm going to do is
perform an inverse operation on it.
And what you see is essentially
the photographic negative.
Now the functions that are comprised in
Vimage run quite a gamut in complexity
from quite simple to quite complex.
This one is way over on the simple side.
It's very easy to do.
The first subject,
first major category was convolution.
I want to say a word
about area processes.
In image processing,
area processes are processes that use
both the source pixel and other pixels
nearby to generate the destination pixel.
Both convolution and morphology,
the first two examples
I'm going to give you,
are examples of area processes.
Convolution, in particular,
creates an output pixel by
taking a weighted sum of pixels
nearby the input or source pixel.
And that weight,
and therefore the effect of the process,
is determined by a matrix
called a convolution kernel.
And that weight,
and therefore the effect of the process,
is determined by a matrix
called a convolution kernel.
So, um,
I want to give you an example
of how convolution works.
What I have here is a fairly
blurry and kind of low intensity
image of downtown Lisbon.
And I want to emphasize that
this was probably poor equipment
and not the photographer's
skill that was involved here.
But anyway, I'm going to operate on this
with a 5x5 sharpening kernel.
And what the result of that is, is this.
A lot of the blurriness is gone.
Features are much sharper than they were.
I'll go back.
That's the blurry part
and the sharpening part.
And you can see the kernel there is 5x5.
It's not that complex.
So all of convolution... ...
...operates the same way.
It's all matrix multiplication
of areas of pixels.
And the effect simply depends
on what the matrix is.
Another example, this edifice.
I'm going to use a rather extreme edge
definition process or edge detection
process and produce an embossed image.
This is, as you can see,
an extremely simple convolution kernel,
3 by 3, to get a pretty dramatic effect.
The second I'd like to talk about,
or the second major topic, morphology.
Morphology in general adjusts the shape
of objects in the image to conform
more closely to the shape of a probe.
And the probe is defined also in a
matrix called a morphology matrix.
In practice it can be
used to take objects,
small or large objects,
in an image and lighten
them or darken them,
make them larger or smaller.
It can be used to alter their shape,
to remove fine details while
preserving larger objects,
and so forth.
So to demonstrate this,
I have here a couple
of very simple images,
a small circle and a large circle.
I'm going to do a morphology process
on these two images using a probe
in the shape of a right triangle.
And it's a fairly large matrix,
about the size of the smaller circle.
So the result of that operation is this.
As you can see, both the circles take
on a more typical shape.
They have a more
triangular characteristic.
And in fact, the smaller circle,
in the smaller circle,
the center circle completely
disappears because of the size
of the convolution kernel.
Secondly, I'm going to take this image,
well that was called a
dilate operation by the way.
I'm going to now do what's
called an erode operation.
I'm going to take a circular filter
about the same size as the kernel here,
operate on these two images,
and I get this result.
So you can see that in the
case of the smaller circle,
all the circularity is gone,
it's turned completely into a triangle.
And the smaller circle has taken
on some triangular structure and
lost a lot of its circularity.
So there is a couple of examples
of morphology in action.
The class of functions in geometry
is pretty much self-explanatory.
They perform some sort of a
geometric operation on the image,
transform it, make it larger, smaller,
reflect it, whatever.
For an example of geometry,
I'm going to take this picture of a J,
and I'm going to transpose
it or translate it,
make it bigger,
but only in the longitudinal direction.
And that results in this image.
Secondly, I'm going to go back to the
original picture and do a shearing
operation off to the right side.
and that results in this image.
And is it my imagination or is that bird
getting more irritated with each picture?
Maybe I've just been looking
at them a little bit too long.
Histogram operations are those that
use an intensity distribution histogram
of the image to perform some function.
The example I'm going to use
is histogram equalization,
a process whereby an image with a poor
non-uniform intensity distribution
is modified so that intensities
are distributed more evenly.
So I'm going to go back to this bed and
breakfast here in Portugal and perform
this equalization operation on it,
and it results in this.
Now what you can see is there's a
great more detail visible here in
this image than in the original.
Notice in particular the
weather stains below the
windowsills on the second floor.
They were virtually undetectable
in the original image.
So this, the equalization operation
brings out a lot of detail that
was absent in the original.
This is probably a lot closer to
the way that building really looked,
would be my guess.
Here's an example,
or rather the before and after
histograms of the intensity distribution.
I've added all three color channels
into each bar to simplify it,
although in practice the operation is
done on each color component separately.
But you can see in the before
image there's a lot of white with
some starkly contrasted black,
and in the after image
it's much more uniform,
a lot of different grays.
So I could go on quite a long
time actually about functionality,
but we do have a limited amount of time,
so I want to proceed on to some
examples of data structures and API.
First I want to talk about data types
and layouts that we support in our
initial incarnation of the image.
There are two different
data types supported.
One is the 8-bit integer per
color component or per channel.
I'll use those terms interchangeably.
And the second is a 32-bit floating point
value per color component or channel.
We also support two
different data layouts.
One is the planar layout whereby
each channel is in its own array.
And if I'm using an
RGB image as an example,
that simply means that the reds,
the greens, and the blues are all in
their separate buffers.
And if you're calling a convolution,
or excuse me, an image process to perform
some function on this image,
you would need to call it three
times for all three color components.
The advantage though is if you don't want
to do the process on all three channels,
you can do them on only
one or two as you wish.
The second layout is what we
call the ARGB interleaved layout,
where all the color channels are
interleaved into a single buffer.
We support at the current time a
four-channel interleaved layout,
which can be either four 8-bit integers
or four 32-bit floating-point values.
[Transcript missing]
We do supply data conversion utilities
to go between the different data
layouts and different data types.
And now I'd like to go on to
what is probably the single
most important data structure,
almost the only public data
structure we have in Vimage,
the Vimage buffer.
As you can see,
it's a very simple data structure,
only four elements.
There's a pointer to
the start of the data,
which would be the upper
left-hand corner of the image,
a height, a number of pixels,
width in the number of pixels,
and then a row bytes,
which is the number of bytes
from one row to another,
or the stride from one row to the other.
Pictorially, if the name of the
Vimage buffer is image,
then we have image.data at
the upper left-hand corner.
You have the height, the width,
and if you imagine that that white
space to the right of the image is extra
memory that's not used in the image,
but just sitting there
at the end of the row,
then you can see that the
row bytes parameter includes
that length in the stride.
That comes in handy if you want to
do 16-byte alignment on each row,
for example.
That's not a requirement by the image,
but certainly may be
helpful in your own work.
[Transcript missing]
This allows you to do tiling,
if you want to do that,
to take advantage of caching,
although we will also do
that for you if you wish.
It has quite a number of
other advantages as well.
So here's an example of equalization,
an example of a very
simple call to Vimage,
image equalization.
There's only three parameters,
it couldn't get too much more simple.
The Vimage buffer source,
the Vimage buffer for the destination,
and then the flags word,
which the information in the flags
word varies with each function.
You notice that you don't have to
specify what the data layout or
the data type is because that's
implicit in the name of the function,
in this case, planar8.
So every function has
four different variants:
planar8, bit, planarFloat,
interleaved8bit, and interleavedFloat.
There are some functions that do require
us to know in the image both the full
image buffer and the region of interest.
And these are the functions
that I mentioned earlier
I referred to as area processes.
The components are all shown here.
You have the full image buffer,
the source ROI,
which may or may not be smaller
than the full image buffer,
a convolution kernel,
a matrix shown by the yellow rectangle,
and then the destination buffer,
the result.
I'd like to go into the relationship
between these things a little bit more.
So this is the discussion,
a further discussion of image
buffers and regions of interest.
Alright, I think we all know what
the full image buffer is.
In a call to an area function,
morphology or convolution,
the region of interest is not
specified by a second V-image buffer,
but rather simply by X and Y offsets
from the beginning of the full buffer.
So, as you can see here,
you would indicate the upper left-hand
corner of the region of interest
by an X and Y offset from the upper
left-hand corner of the full buffer.
The Robites is the same in both cases.
You also pass a V-image buffer
indicating the destination,
which has a height and a width
and independent row bytes.
And notice that we have not
specified as yet the source,
the region of interest, height and width.
And that's for a simple reason.
It has to be the same height
and width as the destination,
so we simply take it from there.
This is an example of one
of these function calls,
convolution.
You have the source and
destination image buffers,
the offsets to the region of interest,
and then some other information
defining the kernel and a few
other things that we need to know.
So this is probably one of
the more complicated calls
that you're going to run into.
We have three computational cases
that we need to worry about when
we're doing these calculations.
The first one is fairly simple,
and to explain this,
just keep in mind the four different
elements that I'm talking about here.
The full image buffer,
the region of interest,
the convolution kernel,
which is simply a matrix,
and then in this image the source pixel
shown by the tiny red rectangle there.
So if we are going to calculate
a destination rectangle
from that source pixel,
we need to do a matrix multiplication
of the pixels in the region of
the source pixel as shown there.
The first case is very simple because
the entire matrix is contained
within the region of interest,
so there's no issue about
where the data comes from.
The second case is a little
bit more complicated.
What happens if the computational
matrix extends out beyond
the region of interest?
And this is exactly why we need to
know what the full image buffer is,
because if it still remains
in the full image buffer,
then we can use that data
without further concern.
The third case is the more complex case.
What if the computational matrix goes
even beyond the full image buffer?
And in that case, what happens?
What happens if the computational matrix
goes even beyond the full image buffer?
And in that case, what happens?
What happens if the computational matrix
goes even beyond the full image buffer?
In that case,
we have to do something to substitute
for the pixels that are missing.
So we have an edge case problem,
and we supply you in this instance
with three different options
to deal with these edge cases:
background, color, edge extend,
and copy in place.
And to demonstrate these three,
I'm going to start with
this as an original image.
All the lines between the different
colors are clean and smooth,
and the edges are clean.
And I'm going to do a
blurring operation on it.
And the first time I'm going to do this,
I'm going to specify that for the edges,
the color to use is black.
If we don't have a pixel
in the computation,
we'll use a black pixel.
So the result of that
comes out like this.
You can see that the colors
merge together on the edges,
and on the outside of the image,
it just fades off into black gradually.
The other extreme of that is
a background color of white,
which ends up looking like this.
With a black background,
you can see quite a difference there.
The second case,
so that was the background color,
the first option that we give you.
The second option we
give you is edge extend,
which means that we take the
pixels at the outside border of
the image and just extend them out,
copy them out as far as we need to,
to perform the operation.
So the result of that
blurring operation is this,
and as you would expect,
you really don't see any change when
you get to the edge of the image,
it just continues on as
it does in the beginning,
or in the middle.
The third case is copy in place.
And what we are saying there is that
if we don't have all the data we need
to do the computation at any point,
then we won't do it.
We'll just copy the source pixel to the
destination pixel and be done with it.
And this is what that looks like.
You have to concentrate on the edges of
the image and you can see that towards
the edges there is no blurring effect.
Once the computational
matrix goes off the edge,
we just do a copy from the source.
So those are the various options that
we give you to handle the edge cases.
A couple of features that
I haven't yet mentioned,
or maybe I have.
All of the Apple libraries,
the vector-accelerated libraries,
are optimized for all Apple processors.
So if you are, for example,
running on a G3,
if the host system is a G3,
then a form of any given routine that
is not vectorized but still highly
optimized for scalar will be chosen.
If you're running on a G4 or a G5,
then an appropriately optimized
vectorized version will be chosen.
This is all done transparently to you,
the caller.
Our system, our library is multi,
Vimage in particular here
is multi-processor safe.
I should also mention that it's
interrupt safe if you take some
precautions to make it interrupt safe.
There's a lot of routines in Vimage
that do call malloc to allocate memory.
However, if you don't want it to do that,
we do give you the option
to supply your own memory.
The calls that need memory also
have an auxiliary call that returns
to you the minimum buffer size that
we will need to do the operation.
So you can call that,
allocate your own memory,
and then there will be no system calls
during the course of the operation.
The image is a standard part of Panther.
The data structures are unencapsulated,
simple and flexible,
and unlike a competitor
or two I could name,
but won't, there is no license fees.
Okay,
so that completes my portion of the talk.
I'd like to bring up my colleague,
Ian Ollmann,
who will talk about implementation
techniques and performance.
Thank you.
I wanted to touch on two subjects,
mostly what you can do to use Vimage
most effectively in your app to get the
best possible performance out of it.
And then just for your own curiosity,
some of the things we did to tune
the functions that you can get
through the Vimage subframework
under the acceleration framework.
So a couple of things
that you can focus on,
a lot you'll touch on.
So there are some alignment,
memory alignment things that you can do.
We don't require that you
do anything in particular,
but some things help,
so I'll mention them.
I'll briefly talk about tiling
and then also some multiprocessing
or real-time considerations.
[Transcript missing]
Tiling, of course,
is a commonly used technique
in image processing.
Basic approach is you divide
up your image into smaller
segments which are cache-sized,
and this allows you to operate
on segments and keep them in the
caches while you're working on them.
So, for example,
if you had several chain filters
you wanted to do in series,
rather than apply one to the whole image,
then do the next filter
to the whole image,
then the third filter to the whole image,
you could pick a small
subset of the image,
do all three to that,
and that means that for the second and
third filters you'd be very likely to
have the pixels already in the caches,
so you'd be less likely to
pay any penalty for going
out to DRAM to get them.
So a few tips on how to do that.
We've found that tiling is
only helpful some of the time,
not all the time.
So don't waste your time if it isn't.
And we found it's very easy to simply
assay to find out whether or not tiling
is going to work for you by just pushing
a small image through your code as it is,
unoptimized,
and then push a big one through.
Take a look at how many pixels per second
you're able to calculate in each case.
If there's a big difference,
then maybe tiling will pay off for you,
and it's worth the time to go through it.
In our experience,
we found that tile sizes that are
the rough will fit in the L1 cache,
which are probably about 16K to 32K,
work best.
Wide is better than tall or square,
and it can be very wide.
We found cases where only 16 pixels high,
but 1,024 is the optimal case.
We also do some tiling
in some of our functions.
If you're going to do your own tiling,
in certain cases we imagine,
although we haven't
found any examples of it,
that these two things work.
These two things could
interact adversely,
so we provided you with a
flag you can pass that says,
"KV image do not tile," which
basically tells us not to tile.
You're going to do it yourself.
Another thing you can do is take
advantage of our planar data format.
Originally we were thinking
of only providing planar,
but we had so many requests
for ARGB that it's a feature.
However,
there are many drawbacks to ARGB,
and if you use planar data
formats you can get around them.
First of all,
for ARGB you may not wish to
operate on the alpha channel,
so it's 25% or 33% more work to use an
ARGB format in that case compared to just
operating on the three color channels.
So going with planar would allow
you to just do the work that you
need to do and skip over the other
stuff and touch less memory as well.
Another nice thing about planar is
that it's kind of a limited form
of tiling in the sense that you've
now split up your image into three
smaller or four smaller parts.
So in certain cases this may allow
you to exist entirely in the cache
rather than half in and half out.
So that would allow you to push
through several filters with just red,
for example, and then move on to just
green and do pretty well.
One of the problems
with geometric tiling,
which is what I presented
in the previous slide,
is that if you've got something with a
kernel matrix that needs to be applied
and where for each pixel you need
to look at all the pixels around it,
that can make tiling a little bit tricky.
So with this one, we're going to do that.
And then finally,
a bit of an implementation detail,
a lot of our ARGB code will
take the ARGB interleave format,
convert it into planar, do the work,
convert it back,
and then give you the result.
All that happens in register,
so it's pretty fast,
but it's nicer not to
have to do it at all.
So if you use planar data,
you probably will get
somewhat better performance.
we often see the difference is about 30%.
[Transcript missing]
So in practice, in order to achieve that,
the simple things, you can unroll loops.
We aren't doing that to get
rid of the loop overhead.
We're getting that to make sure
that we have 8 or 12 or 50 or
however many parallel calculations
we have going on concurrently
so we can keep the processor full.
We identify and eliminate
compiler aliasing.
So if you have pointers
pointing to buffers,
the compiler might not know how
these overlap and it might decide to
keep the load store order from load,
do operation store, load,
do operation store in strict order.
We want to eliminate LSU bottlenecks.
A lot of code just spends all of its
time loading data in and out of register.
So we look for ways to
merge small operations,
many small operations
into a few big ones.
And that way we can spend most
of our time actually doing work.
If you have certain instructions
that are spending a lot of time,
they take six, eight,
ten cycles to get through.
Then we try to find enough work to keep
us busy while we wait for that to happen.
We avoid branching like the plague.
So we use a lot of selects and other
kinds of things to make sure that
our code flies in a straight line.
As I mentioned earlier,
we try to keep all the execution
units busy at the same time.
So if we're busy doing something
in the floating point unit,
this might be a good time to also
be loading data for the next loop.
So we schedule things
pretty aggressively.
And finally, we prefetch our data.
Just to make sure it's in the
cache when we need it so we don't
have to take a long stall waiting
for data to appear out of DRAM.
Insofar as our... ...tiling goes,
we only did it for some
functions because we only found
only some functions benefited.
Generally what we did was we
took a look at... ...first the
experiment I suggested earlier,
run a small image and a big one
and see whether there is some
improvement for doing smaller images.
We also took a look at
different tile shapes.
So here you see a graph where I've
taken a 3x3 kernel and a 21x21
kernel for the same function.
And looked at how much time it
takes for different tile widths.
The tiles are all the same size.
It's just we widen them and... ...shrink
them vertically at the same time.
So you can see that there is
some advantage to a particular
tile width in this case.
1,024,
2048 bytes is probably the optimal case.
So that's what we choose.
So, and then of course we tune
these things per processors.
We actually end up running this
experiment several times to make
sure that the tile sizes we pick for
G3 are optimal for G3 and the ones we
pick for G4 and G5 are optimal there.
Finally, just to stress,
like everything else in
Accelerate framework,
we vectorize.
So our intent is to use the
velocity engine across the
board everywhere we can.
So you'll see that in the final product,
we're going to have Altevec
pretty much everywhere.
The only exception is
going to be Histogram,
which is a class of functions
that just don't work very
well with the vector unit.
Typical speedups we see over scalar
code for that is 4 to 10 times.
If you haven't tried vectorization,
I suggest you do.
That doesn't mean that our
scalar code is any sludge.
We make sure that runs
as fast as possible,
too.
And in a couple of cases,
such as our sampling filters,
we use the extra speed to deliver
a lot better image quality.
So hopefully you'll like that.
And I've got this as a beta release,
so I'm quite finished.
Every bit of vectorization
I'd like to do,
but certainly we're working hard at it.
Finally,
experimentally driven optimization.
We never guess.
If we find we are guessing,
we try to figure out how to run
the right experiment to find
out what's actually going on.
So obviously, always profile.
I'm sure you've heard that before.
You can use tools like gprof and sampler,
but those only give you
function-level information.
It'll only tell you which
function is performing slowly.
It won't tell you why or what
part of it or what instruction
in particular is getting a stall.
So actually, most of our work is done
using Chud or Shark,
which they're going to
talk about later on today.
And I'll invite Eric to
give us a short overview.
Eric Chud: Thank you, Eric.
So we're going to talk about what
we're doing with our CPU for.
And we also use
CPU simulators like SIMG4.
And so these things can be used
to actually narrow in and directly
tell whether we're running into
cache misses or paging or any
of a number of other problems,
which historically have been very
hard to tell what exactly is going on.
And you're just kind of
guessing what's going on.
But we don't.
We zero in on a problem and solve that.
And that lets us very efficiently
get to the high-performance code.
So, finally, if you aren't already,
I'll urge you to inspect our
compiler output for functions
that really make a difference,
since we are almost always surprised
by some of the mistakes we make.
So with that,
I'll introduce Eric Miller from the
Architecture Performance Group to
come up here and tell you
a little bit about Chud,
which is the tool that
we use to tune our code.
Good morning, I'm Eric Miller with the
Architecture Performance Group.
As Ian said, the CHUD tools are one
of his favorite toys,
and I'm glad he put it on the list,
although I would like to see
him reverse the order and put
it above GPROF and Sampler,
but that's just me.
So, what are CHUD tools?
Well, there are a suite of
performance analysis tools.
There are several that are interesting,
probably the most interesting
we'll get to in a minute,
but the idea behind them is that
they give you low-level access to the
performance monitor hardware counters in
the processor and the memory controller,
and then we have implemented some
software versions in the operating system
that behave exactly the same as the
hardware performance monitor counters.
The idea is to help you find problems
and improve your code performance.
And the best part is they're
freely available on the web.
And they're also on
the Developer Tools CD.
One of the neat things about the
CD this year is that you'll be able
to install the tools and immediately
we have a Chud updater which is
very similar to Software Updater.
[Transcript missing]
So we generally will put out a
release every week at least during
the beta period and probably
slightly reduce the frequency
later once we have it gold master.
So there are three main tools.
The first tool is a
profiling tool called Shark,
which Ian alluded to.
It is an instruction level profiler.
It can do many things that
we'll get to in a minute.
And not the least of which is,
Ian mentioned that you can inspect your
[Transcript missing]
Saturn is a call-grab visualizer,
as it says.
What the idea there is,
is it's kind of like using Gprof.
It goes through and actually
instruments all your application
code and then produces the results of
how often the functions get called.
But you can also have auxiliary
information with regard to
performance monitor counts.
We also have several tracing tools.
Amber,
which actually when you run Amber can
collect every single instruction that is
executed on behalf of your application on
the processor and put that into a file.
And then those files
will be consumed by ACID,
which is a tool that
we wrote in our group,
and by SIMG4,
which is produced by Motorola, and SIMG5,
which will be produced by IBM.
Those are cycle-accurate CPU simulators.
And of course Ian and his team use
the SIMG4 product quite readily.
The other thing you can
do with the CHUD tools is
instrument your applications.
And along with that,
I'm running out of dots on the slide,
but you can also create your own
application performance analysis
tools using the CHUD framework because
that's the exact framework that we
developed in order to create Shark,
Monster, and Saturn.
So, I mentioned performance
counters several times.
What are they?
Well,
they're a series of dedicated special
purpose registers actually in the
processor and in the memory controller
that we create that's in the G4,
G5, and G3 systems.
So what we can do with those is
set them up to count and record
what we call performance events.
Things like the number of L1 cache
misses or L2 cache misses or L3
cache misses or instruction counts,
instruction misses, execution stalls,
page faults in the operating system.
There are a plethora of events.
In fact, on G4,
you have something in the order of
maybe 200 events you can measure.
On G5, there are literally thousands
of events that can be measured.
So we use the CHUD tools,
and in particular the CHUD framework,
to configure and control all the PMCs.
So, I'm not going to do any
demos this morning because
we're pretty short on time,
but I just wanted to mention
Shark because all you do to use
Shark is push the start button and
it will profile the entire system.
It defaults to a time profile and
what that will give you is in your
application when you select it from the
list of profiled threads or processes,
you'll see where in your application
in relation to your source code will
highlight it for you and show you
this is where you spent your time.
If you do an event profile,
suppose you selected CPU cycles,
Shark can tell you exactly how
many cycles were spent in your
code for a particular line of code.
And Shark captures every
single thread on the system,
the driver,
any drivers or kernel extensions,
the kernel itself,
and all the applications that
are running at any given time.
The best thing about Shark is
it's very low overhead,
as are all the Chud tools.
You can actually set the time profile
down to a minimum of about 50 seconds.
So, you can actually set the time profile
50 microseconds per time sample,
which is a couple of order magnitudes
smaller than you can use with sampler.
It also gives you an automated analysis
which will show up as this column of
exclamation points beside your code.
So we annotate your source code,
you click on these annotations,
and it will tell you things like
this loop has a non-changing
variable and it's serialized,
so you might want to move
that variable out of the loop,
or if this loop is a good candidate
for Altevec or parallelization because
there aren't any data dependencies.
We do static analysis and this
can lead to the surprises that
Ian mentioned from the compiler.
It actually will show you the
disassembly with the compiler
generated on your behalf and annotate
that as to how many stalls you'll have,
how many delays might be
involved from other aspects.
New features this year from, well,
let me say this,
Shark was formerly called Shikari
in the Chud Tools from last year.
So it's been renamed Shark with
a lot of new features.
One of the features is that you can
now save and review all the sessions
that you collect for later analysis.
And there's also a command line
version that you can use to
instrument with scripts and things.
So we use this command line version
of Shark whenever we have a old
Unix scientific application that
just runs in the command line.
And it has a launch script.
We can just script Shark to begin and
then run our command line application
as normal and then script Shark to end.
Here's a little photograph of SHARC.
And what you can see in the
left-hand picture would be the
result of actually a time profile.
And in this particular picture,
we were running a test and it
turned out that the square root
function was 42% of the time.
At the bottom of that left-hand picture,
you can see there's a
little process menu,
and that lists all the processes
that were running on the
system when you did the trace.
You can choose from any of those,
and normally you would choose your own.
This is a screenshot
from last year's demo.
[Transcript missing]
The next tool is Monster,
which is the most direct way
to configure and set up the
performance monitor counters.
You can use a, in CHUD tools in general,
there are timed intervals so you
can select a certain number of
milliseconds or microseconds or seconds
for that matter that you would like
to collect per sample in the hardware.
You can also collect data
based on other events.
You can set it up to collect a
sample every so many cycles or
every so many instructions completed
or every so many cache misses.
There's also a third way that actually is
related to both which is called a hotkey.
All the CHUD tools have a global hotkey.
In the case of Shark it's Option Escape,
in the case of Monster it's
Command Escape.
And if you use those keys,
you don't actually have to have
the application in front of the
and David Koehn.
The next session will be about
the application of the Monster.
The information from the memory
controller about transactions,
reads and writes,
and you know the amount of time
because they're sampled over time,
for example.
Then you can take those
transactions and apply a calculation
to them we call shortcuts.
So you can say every read is 16 bytes,
so I take the number of reads,
multiply by 16 bytes,
I have the number of bytes,
divide by the time, I have the bandwidth.
So you can set up these calculations
in Monster and have additional
columns in your spreadsheet.
and these calculations
are just standard infix,
mathematic notation with
parentheses and it's basically
a four function calculator.
There's a table and you can
also draw charts and Shark is
also capable of drawing charts.
Then you can also,
new in this version of Monster,
you can save and review the sessions
and the nice thing about this is
you can review sessions on a system
that you don't have in front of you.
So you could do collections if
you had a G5 at your disposal.
You could collect data with
Shark or Monster on your G5,
then take it back to your laptop or
your desktop G4 or even your iMac and
review those results and print off
the charts and those sorts of things.
And there's also a scriptable
command line version of
Monster which is new this year.
Here's a screenshot of Monster.
On the left of the first
of the leftmost image,
there's a column that where you
if you click on those entries,
will highlight those columns in the data.
So,
and when you highlight columns of data,
you can then just press the draw chart
button and it would result in a chart.
And there's many options for charting.
There's bar charts,
various colorizations,
line charts with markers,
logarithmic scales, direct scales,
samples over time,
and samples as a single
x-axis just per sample plots.
You can see in this particular
case that what's been highlighted
are some of the shortcuts.
So a load store session was done,
so all the load
instructions were collected.
All the store instructions
were collected.
And all the regular
instructions were collected.
And then percentages of each
were calculated along with that,
you know, for every sample.
Each sample is listed
horizontally in the table there.
And so vertically is
each of these shortcuts.
So then you just highlight those columns
of shortcuts and we plot the percentages,
which is what you see
in the second picture.
There is quite an extensive set
of sampling controls to configure
the performance monitor counters
in both Shark and Monster.
So the last thing is a
new tool we call Saturn,
which record, like it says,
you record your function call history,
and the way we do this is by
instrumenting the functions
at entry and exit with GCC.
There's a compiler flag that
you throw and do a build,
and it'll inject all the Saturn entry
and exit prolog and epilog functions
in every function in your application.
Now, to be completely thorough,
you have to go through and recompile
all of the frameworks and libraries,
and that's similar to Gprof,
which is really not that fun to do,
so most of the time we like to focus
just on actual application code.
But the nice thing about Saturn is that
once you have this function call history,
you can visualize that call tree,
and here in this image you can see
that the call tree for CSE under
main has been highlighted,
and you see the red dashes in
that stack of the call tree.
And you can see the red bars there.
That's where that function
is called and run.
So what you would want
to use Saturn for is,
in particular with C++,
you have a lot of call depth.
So you want to -- things
are very skinny and tall.
You're spending a lot of time calling
functions and not doing any work,
so you want to try to avoid that.
You want to have a nice flat profile.
You can also collect call counts,
PMC event counts,
and execution times by using the
performance monitor counters with
your instrumented functions that
are injected at entry and exit
of your each of your functions.
So, as I mentioned on the first slide,
we've got the instruction
tracing and simulation.
AMBER is the instruction
tracing mechanism,
and the resultant files are
in a format that's called TT6.
These TT6 files are consumed by the
other programs mentioned on this slide,
which is a trace -- ACID is
our internal trace analyzer,
and actually,
the ACID trace analyzer is the
parent of the code coach and the
parts in SHARC that explain why
you have bottlenecks and what
you might do to change them.
These come out of ACID.
And it can also do a
couple things on its own,
which is memory footprint
of your application.
It'll give you a little GNU plot file.
You can find your instruction
sequences that may be an issue and
then try and remove those through the
informational notes that it gives you.
SIMG4 is a cycle accurate
simulator for PPC7400,
which is an old MAX processor
from the early G4 systems.
And SIMG5 will be available in
the future -- in the near future,
and that'll be a cycle accurate
simulator for the new PPC970.
These can be quite handy
in tracing particularly
complicated performance issues,
although the output to SIMG4 and
SIMG5 requires a terminal window.
Maybe -- maybe would require maybe
a 50 inch monitor that would work.
Lastly,
the CHUD framework is available to,
like I said, instrument your source code.
One of the things you can do
with instrumentation is do
one function call to start and
stop monster or shark sampling.
So you can sort of put a caliper
around your interesting code.
Suppose you find a piece of code
that Shark says is a hotspot and
you want to get more detailed
and just trace through that,
you can add code.
It's CHUD start remote
performance monitor and CHUD stop
remote performance monitor.
And what happens is you set it,
you just click a key in monster or
shark and it will be in remote mode
and be waiting for messages from your
application and your application only.
So you can just...
and many others.
You can just collect the data
for your interesting code.
You can directly read and report on the
PMCs by writing small pieces of code,
either instrumented in your
application or write a separate
stand-alone application.
As I mentioned,
you can write your own performance
tools and do all the things that
need to be done in order to create
a performance tool like SHARC,
which is control the
performance monitor counters,
collect the information
about the system hardware,
which can be handy in a lot of ways.
You can know that you're on a G5,
you can know that you're on a G3,
you can know the bus speed of the system,
the amount of memory in the system,
number of processors.
You can also modify some
of that information.
And there also is an HTML reference
document online that describes all the
various functions in the CHUD framework.
Here's a small example of
code with the CHUD framework.
And this is, I mentioned,
that instrument your code to
start and stop Shark or Monster.
So you just have to include
the CHUD H header file,
initialize,
and then acquire the remote access,
start Remote Performance Monitor with
a label that will show up in your
output in Shark or Monster so you
know which instrumentation it was.
Then you run through your important code,
stop the monitor,
release the remote access.
Secondly, a slightly more complex mode,
I mentioned you can write your
own performance monitoring tool.
You initialize,
acquire the sampling facility,
you turn on some special filters,
maybe mark your process as
the only one to be counted,
and then you set the events.
In particular, you say both CPUs,
process performance
monitor counter number one,
event number one,
which happens to be cycles,
and event number two,
which happens to be instructions.
Clear the counters, start the counters,
your important function executes,
stop the counters,
then you collect these results and you
can perform a calculation and get cycles
per instruction in your own application.
For more information about that stuff,
you can get your own
download at this web address:
developer.apple.com/tools/debuggers.html
And then you can always contact
myself and my colleagues on the
Chud Tools Development Team at
this email address.
And we try to be pretty responsive,
and that's probably the best
way to get your feature requests
and complaints into our queue.
Let's see what's next.
Oh, I guess I'm done.
So let me bring up Mr.
Keithley.
That'd be great.
So the roadmap,
a couple more sessions today,
obviously one specializing
in CHUD itself.
We should move on to Q&A pretty quickly.
We're into that time right now.
Here's some contact info.
Our reference library information.